This file is INSTALL.  It contains installation instructions for cgi.tcl.

If you do not have Tcl, get it (the README explains how) and install
it.  The rest of these instructions assume that you have Tcl
installed.

--------------------
Installation
--------------------

By default, the Tcl source directory is assumed to be in the same
directory as the cgi.tcl source directory.  For example, in this
listing, cgi.tcl and Tcl are both stored in /usr/local/src:

	/usr/local/src/tcl7.5		(actual version may be different)
	/usr/local/src/cgi.tcl-1.0	(actual version may be different)

If Tcl is stored elsewhere, the easiest way to deal with this is to
create a symbolic link to its real directory.  For example, from the
cgi.tcl directory, type:

	ln -s /some/where/else/src/tcl7.5 ..

Run "./configure".  This will generate a Makefile (from a prototype
called "Makefile.in") appropriate to your system.  Make sure you run
configure with the same arguments as when you ran Tcl's configure
script.  (If you don't, package loading won't work.)

Most people will not need to make any changes to the generated
Makefile and can go on to the next step.  If you want though, you can
edit the Makefile and change any definitions as appropriate for your
site.  All the definitions you are likely to want to change are
clearly identified and described at the beginning of the file.

Run "make".

It is useful (although not necessary) for cgi.tcl to understand how to
send mail.  By default, cgi.tcl tries to use /usr/lib/sendmail,
otherwise it falls back to carrying out the raw SMTP dialogue itself.
Any mailer can be substituted by modifying cgi.tcl appropriately.  It
is easy to do.  Edit cgi.tcl and look at the cgi_mail_end procedure.
It should be obvious what to do at that point.  The ability to send
mail isn't required for basic use of cgi.tcl, but it is especially
useful for in-the-field debugging so I encourage you to enable it.

You can now "source cgi.tcl" if you want to try things out by hand
before installing (or if you want to use the package without
installing it).  Example:

  	$ tclsh7.6 (or whatever your Tcl interpreter is called)
	% source cgi.tcl
	% h4 "Don Libes"
	<h4>Don Libes</h4>
	%

Once you're done playing, go ahead and install it.  To install everything:

	make install

You're done!  Now you can use cgi.tcl.

--------------------
Examples
--------------------

The example directory has some examples.  See the README in there.

--------------------
Test Suite
--------------------

There is no test suite.

--------------------
Uninstalling
--------------------

"make uninstall" removes all the files that "make install" creates
(excluding those in the current directory).

--------------------
Cleaning Up
--------------------

Several "clean" targets are available to reduce space consumption of
the cgi.tcl source.  The two most useful are as follows:

"make clean" deletes all files from the current directory that were
created by "make"

"make distclean" is like "make clean", but it also deletes files
created by "configure"

Other targets can be found in the Makefile.  They follow the GNU
Makefile conventions.

